# Historiography

Articles and books concerning the Palazzo Medici have abounded over the last century, each concerned with varying aspects of the building.  Throughout the scholarly work on the Palazzo Medici, the drastically distinctive and influential nature of the Palazzo’s exterior architecture, within the background of the previous predominant architectural style of Florence, is usually the focus.  Palaces throughout Florence drew inspiration from the Palazzo Medici; the most obvious cases include the residences of the Strozzi, Rucellai, and Gondi families. These palazzi all adopted the tripartite divisions of the façade articulated through rustication, the biforate layout of windows, and the exterior benches for public seating that the Palazzo Medici introduced.  On the other hand, some scholars have argued that the building was not so revolutionary, suggesting instead that the Palazzo Medici actually drew quite heavily from medieval precedents. Even more recently, scholars such as Isabelle Hyman have added to both of these approaches by highlighting the level to which the Palazzo Medici borrowed and adapted forms from public architecture.   Hyman highlights the “rusticated stonework and the biforate windows as direct visual connections with the architecture of authority.”   Attention to the exterior of the Palazzo far eclipses interest given to the interior.  The most likely explanation for this trend has to do with what is still extant.  The exterior of the residence, with the exception of the loggia, has changed little from what was visible upon its completion around 1455.

In contrast, the interior of the Palazzo has faced numerous renovations and additions, which have altered the structure of the rooms and spaces within its stonewalls. The most comprehensive interpretation to date of the original layout of the Palazzo's interior is that of Wolfger Bulst.   Using plans dated to 1650, Bulst has attempted to identify each of the rooms in the Palazzo with the help of inventories and contemporary records.   Reconstructions of the interior of the residence, including art, furnishings, and decorations, have been both aided and hindered by the inventories recorded for each head of the family.   While these inventories amply document the density of objects within the residence, they are rife with complications for the historian looking for specific information about the contents of the Palazzo. Problems include rooms that are often unclearly labeled, with several rooms sharing the same title; works of sculpture or large furniture were sometimes considered part of the building, not an individual's possessions and as such were left out; works of art were often incorrectly attributed or described so sparingly as to be unidentifiable.  This set of challenges has not deterred scholars from identifying a number of works that originally hung within the Palazzo until Lorenzo's death in 1492.

Francis Ames-Lewis has contributed greatly to the identification of works of art within the Palazzo Medici.  His catalogue of the library of Piero di Cosimo de'Medici, housed in a study of the Palazzo Medici, provides a valuable resource not only to literary scholars but also for those looking to authenticate the literary influences the Medici brought to their artistic commissions.   Perhaps even more useful to the study of the interior of the Palazzo is the paper in which Ames-Lewis aimed to explore the political iconography present within key works of art.   Focusing on individual works located throughout the Palazzo, Ames-Lewis connected the figures of St. Bernard, Hercules, and David in these Medicean works of art with the same figures already in the service of the Signoria.  He argues that the appropriation of the civic imagery of Florence was a conscious choice on the part of the Medici; the decision to include so many public symbols of Florence signaled the viewer of the shift of power from the Palazzo della Signoria to the Palazzo Medici.

In an effort to provide as complete a context as possible, the works of Dale Kent and F.W. Kent provide a deeper and multifaceted understanding of the Medici, as well as the culture of Renaissance Florence.  Dale Kent's comprehensive examination of the patriarch of the Medici, Cosimo, delves into nearly every conceivable aspect of his world-his patronage, religion, philosophy, and education are used to develop a better understanding of the man who led the Medici to supremacy.  Her book Cosimo de' Medici and the Florentine Renaissance presents overall themes regarding the patron's oeuvre, finding evidence throughout Cosimo's patronage, possessions, correspondence, and contemporary records.  It is truly a remarkable work, covering voluminous data from many disciplines and sources; however, as with any project of such scale, the more focused themes within individual projects are not developed in great depth. When discussing the art and architecture of the Palazzo Medici, Kent relays many of the arguments presented by previous scholars.  Subsequently, the works that receive the most attention are those well-known already, such as the works of Donatello. However, though they are not given a tremendous amount of space, Kent does look into some of the lesser known works by Fra Lippi or Fra Angelico. She has been able to posit connections and messages about these works through her familiarity with the records and letters of the Medici.

F.W. Kent, in contrast, has developed cultural studies of Renaissance Florence in a broader sense, focusing on the ties of patronage and family structures.  His article, “Palaces, Politics, and Society,” explores the functions of Renaissance palazzi.   While not focusing on the Palazzo Medici alone, he does state that “The Medici palace was so potent a political fact and symbols that it set the stylistic terms within which most other Florentine palace builders were to work for the rest of the fifteenth century.”   His work provides a sense of what patrician palaces like the Palazzo Medici were used for, namely the building of connections and legacies within the neighborhood and city.  F.W. Kent's recent work, Lorenzo de Medici & the Art of Magnificence, addresses the specific cultural world of Lorenzo.   A considerably more condensed work than Dale Kent's treatment of Lorenzo's grandfather, the book still provides an intriguing mix of biography and careful research that makes it a valuable source in understanding the world of the Medici.

Although these scholarly pursuits are important, there is little work on the importance the Palazzo Medici, and its decoration, played in the schema of Florence’s civic milieu.  The palazzo was vital in providing a space for the client/patron ritual to occur and for the Medici to set the stage for promoting their power by portraying themselves as having the best interest of Florence as their primary goal.  Because the Palazzo Medici was built from the ground up, unlike other palazzo’s in Florence, Cosimo had the ability to shape space in any manner they chose.  The design could have continued the medieval Italian tradition of towered buildings, but instead they choose to center the Palazzo around a central courtyard.  The decision was made to abandon the design of earlier Florentine residences in favor of the model of the Classical Roman past. The Medici used their home to propagate support and simultaneously dissuade members of their faction from adopting the accusations of their enemies.  The visitors to the Palazzo Medici were exposed to a specific program of messages tailored to each type of viewer.
